platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/dependency-management/declaring-dependencies/declaring_dependencies_basics.adoc, before:

// Copyright (C) 2024 Gradle, Inc.
//
// Licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.;
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[declaring-dependencies-basics]]
= Declaring Dependencies Basics

[[sec:dependency-types]]
== Types of dependencies

There are three main types of dependencies in Gradle:

1. *Module Dependencies*: Refer to libraries from external repositories.
2. *Project Dependencies*: Refer to other projects in the same multi-project build.
3. *File Dependencies*: Refer to local files or directories, such as `.jar` or `.aar` files.

[[sec:module-dependencies]]
=== 1. Module dependencies

Module dependencies are the most common dependencies.
They refer to a dependency that is identified by module coordinates (group, name, and version).

Module dependencies are declared using the single-string notation, where the group, name, and version are joined into a single string:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=module-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=module-dependencies]"]
====

Gradle also supports the multi-string notation, where each coordinate may be declared separately:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=module-dependencies-map]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=module-dependencies-map]"]
====

NOTE: The multi-string notation for module dependencies has been deprecated and will not be supported starting in Gradle 10. Use the single-string notation instead.

Module dependencies use the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/ExternalModuleDependency.html[`ExternalModuleDependency`] and link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html[`DependencyHandler`] APIs.
These APIs provide various properties and configuration methods for defining dependencies.

For advanced configurations, such as enforcing strict versions, you can also provide a closure when alongside these notations.

[[sec:project-dependencies]]
=== 2. Project dependencies

Project dependencies allow you to reference other projects within a multi-project Gradle build.

image::dependency-management-project-dependencies.png[]

This is useful for organizing large projects into smaller, modular components:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-projectDependencies/kotlin",files="web-service/build.gradle.kts[tags=project-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-projectDependencies/groovy",files="web-service/build.gradle[tags=project-dependencies]"]
====

Gradle uses the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:project(java.lang.String)[`project()`] function to define a project dependency.
This function takes the relative path to the target project within the build.
The path is typically defined using a colon (`:`) to separate different levels of the project structure.

Project dependencies are automatically resolved such that the dependent project is always built before the project that depends on it.

[[sec:type-safe-project-accessors]]
==== Type-safe project dependencies

Type-safe project accessors are an incubating feature which must be enabled explicitly.
Implementation may change at any time.

To add support for type-safe project accessors, add `enableFeaturePreview("TYPESAFE_PROJECT_ACCESSORS")` this to your `settings.gradle(.kts)` file:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=accessors]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=accessors]"]
====

One downside of using the `project(":some:path")` notation is the need to remember project paths for dependencies.
Moreover, changing a project path requires manually updating every occurrence, increasing the risk of missing one.

Instead, the experimental type-safe project accessors API provides IDE completion, making it easier to declare dependencies:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/kotlin",files="web-service/build.gradle.kts[tags=project-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/groovy",files="web-service/build.gradle[tags=project-dependencies]"]
====

With this API, incorrectly specified projects in Kotlin DSL scripts trigger compilation errors, helping you avoid missed updates.

Project accessors are based on project paths.
For instance, the path `:commons:utils:some:lib` becomes `projects.commons.utils.some.lib`, while kebab-case (`some-lib`) and snake-case (`some_lib`) are converted to camel case: `projects.someLib`.

[[sec:file-dependencies]]
=== 3. File dependencies

File dependencies allow you to include external JARs or other files directly into your project by referencing their file paths.
File dependencies also allow you to add a set of files directly to a configuration without using a repository.

NOTE: File dependencies are generally discouraged.
Instead, prefer declaring dependencies on an external repository, or if necessary, declaring a maven or ivy repository using a `file://` URL.

image::dependency-management-file-dependencies.png[]

File dependencies are unique because they represent a direct reference to files on the filesystem without any associated <<glossary.adoc#sub:terminology_module_metadata,metadata>>, such as transitive dependencies, origin, or author information.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-fileDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=file-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-fileDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=file-dependencies]"]
====

In this example, each dependency explicitly specifies its location within the file system.
Common methods for referencing these files include:

- link:link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:files(java.lang.Object++[]++)[`Project.files()`]: Accepts one or more file paths directly.
- link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/file/ProjectLayout.html#files-java.lang.Object++...++-[`ProjectLayout.files()`]: Accepts one or more file paths directly.
- link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:fileTree(java.lang.Object)[`Project.fileTree()`]: Defines a directory and includes or excludes specific file patterns.

[NOTE]
====
The order of files in a `FileTree` is not guaranteed to be stable, even on the same computer.
As a result, dependency configurations using `FileTree` may produce resolution results with varying order, which can impact the cacheability of tasks that use these results as inputs.
To ensure more predictable and stable behavior, it is recommended to use the simpler `files` method where possible.
====

Alternatively, you can use a <<supported_repository_types.adoc#sec:flat-dir-resolver,flat directory>> repository to specify the source directory for multiple file dependencies.

Ideally, you should use Maven or Ivy repository with a local URL:

[source,groovy]
----
repositories {
    maven {
        url = 'file:///path/to/local/files' // Replace with your actual path
    }
}
----

To add files as dependencies, pass a <<working_with_files.adoc#sec:file_collections,file collection>> to the configuration:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=file-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=file-dependencies]"]
====

Note that file dependencies are not included in the published dependency descriptor for your project.
However, they are available in transitive dependencies within the same build, meaning they can be used within the current build but not outside it.

You should specify which tasks produce the files for a file dependency.
Otherwise, the necessary tasks might not run when you depend on them transitively from another project:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/generatedFileDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=generated-file-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/generatedFileDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=generated-file-dependencies]"]
====

----
$ gradle -q list
include::{snippetsPath}/artifacts/generatedFileDependencies/tests/generatedFileDependencies.out[]
----

[[sec:gradle-distribution-dependencies]]
== Gradle distribution-specific dependencies

[[sec:api-dependencies]]
=== Gradle API dependency

You can declare a dependency on the API of the current version of Gradle by using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler:gradleApi()[DependencyHandler.gradleApi()] method.
This is useful when you are developing custom Gradle tasks or plugins:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/customExternalTask/kotlin/task",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=gradle-api-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/customExternalTask/groovy/task",files="build.gradle[tags=gradle-api-dependencies]"]
====

[[sec:testkit-dependencies]]
=== Gradle TestKit dependency

You can declare a dependency on the TestKit API of the current version of Gradle by using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler:gradleTestKit()[DependencyHandler.gradleTestKit()] method.
This is useful for writing and executing functional tests for Gradle plugins and build scripts:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testKit/junitQuickstart/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=declare-gradle-testkit-dependency]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testKit/junitQuickstart/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=declare-gradle-testkit-dependency]"]
====

[[sec:groovy-dependencies]]
=== Local Groovy dependency

You can declare a dependency on the Groovy that is distributed with Gradle by using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler:localGroovy()[DependencyHandler.localGroovy()] method.
This is useful when you are developing custom Gradle tasks or plugins in Groovy:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/groovy/groovyDependency/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=bundled-groovy-dependency]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/groovy/groovyDependency/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=bundled-groovy-dependency]"]
====

[[sec:documenting-dependencies]]
== Documenting dependencies

When declaring a dependency or a <<dependency_constraints.adoc#dependency-constraints,dependency constraint>>, you can provide a reason to clarify why the dependency is included.
This helps make your build script and the <<viewing_debugging_dependencies.adoc#sec:identifying-reason-dependency-selection,dependency insight report>> easier to interpret:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/inspectingDependencies-dependencyReason/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=dependency-reason]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/inspectingDependencies-dependencyReason/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=dependency-reason]"]
====

In this example, the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/DependencyConstraint.html#because(java.lang.String)[`because()`] method provides a reason for including the `asm` library, which helps explain its purpose in the context of the build:

----
$ gradle -q dependencyInsight --dependency asm
include::{snippetsPath}/dependencyManagement/inspectingDependencies-dependencyReason/tests/dependencyReasonReport.out[]
----

Commit message:

change the dependency on gradleApi() that the java-gradle-plugin plugin from api to compileOnly + testImplementation
fixes #34539

Signed-off-by: John Burns <wakingrufus@gmail.com>

Update platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/releases/upgrading/upgrading_version_9.adoc

Co-authored-by: Tom Tresansky <tom.tresansky@gmail.com>
Signed-off-by: John Burns <wakingrufus@users.noreply.github.com>

mark API_CONFIGURATION in JavaGradlePluginPlugin  Deprecated as it is no longer used

platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/dependency-management/declaring-dependencies/declaring_dependencies_basics.adoc, after:

// Copyright (C) 2024 Gradle, Inc.
//
// Licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.;
// you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
// You may obtain a copy of the License at
//
//      https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/
//
// Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
// distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
// WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
// See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
// limitations under the License.

[[declaring-dependencies-basics]]
= Declaring Dependencies Basics

[[sec:dependency-types]]
== Types of dependencies

There are three main types of dependencies in Gradle:

1. *Module Dependencies*: Refer to libraries from external repositories.
2. *Project Dependencies*: Refer to other projects in the same multi-project build.
3. *File Dependencies*: Refer to local files or directories, such as `.jar` or `.aar` files.

[[sec:module-dependencies]]
=== 1. Module dependencies

Module dependencies are the most common dependencies.
They refer to a dependency that is identified by module coordinates (group, name, and version).

Module dependencies are declared using the single-string notation, where the group, name, and version are joined into a single string:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=module-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=module-dependencies]"]
====

Gradle also supports the multi-string notation, where each coordinate may be declared separately:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=module-dependencies-map]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=module-dependencies-map]"]
====

NOTE: The multi-string notation for module dependencies has been deprecated and will not be supported starting in Gradle 10. Use the single-string notation instead.

Module dependencies use the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/ExternalModuleDependency.html[`ExternalModuleDependency`] and link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html[`DependencyHandler`] APIs.
These APIs provide various properties and configuration methods for defining dependencies.

For advanced configurations, such as enforcing strict versions, you can also provide a closure when alongside these notations.

[[sec:project-dependencies]]
=== 2. Project dependencies

Project dependencies allow you to reference other projects within a multi-project Gradle build.

image::dependency-management-project-dependencies.png[]

This is useful for organizing large projects into smaller, modular components:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-projectDependencies/kotlin",files="web-service/build.gradle.kts[tags=project-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-projectDependencies/groovy",files="web-service/build.gradle[tags=project-dependencies]"]
====

Gradle uses the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:project(java.lang.String)[`project()`] function to define a project dependency.
This function takes the relative path to the target project within the build.
The path is typically defined using a colon (`:`) to separate different levels of the project structure.

Project dependencies are automatically resolved such that the dependent project is always built before the project that depends on it.

[[sec:type-safe-project-accessors]]
==== Type-safe project dependencies

Type-safe project accessors are an incubating feature which must be enabled explicitly.
Implementation may change at any time.

To add support for type-safe project accessors, add `enableFeaturePreview("TYPESAFE_PROJECT_ACCESSORS")` this to your `settings.gradle(.kts)` file:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=accessors]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=accessors]"]
====

One downside of using the `project(":some:path")` notation is the need to remember project paths for dependencies.
Moreover, changing a project path requires manually updating every occurrence, increasing the risk of missing one.

Instead, the experimental type-safe project accessors API provides IDE completion, making it easier to declare dependencies:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/kotlin",files="web-service/build.gradle.kts[tags=project-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-typeSafeProjectDependencies/groovy",files="web-service/build.gradle[tags=project-dependencies]"]
====

With this API, incorrectly specified projects in Kotlin DSL scripts trigger compilation errors, helping you avoid missed updates.

Project accessors are based on project paths.
For instance, the path `:commons:utils:some:lib` becomes `projects.commons.utils.some.lib`, while kebab-case (`some-lib`) and snake-case (`some_lib`) are converted to camel case: `projects.someLib`.

[[sec:file-dependencies]]
=== 3. File dependencies

File dependencies allow you to include external JARs or other files directly into your project by referencing their file paths.
File dependencies also allow you to add a set of files directly to a configuration without using a repository.

NOTE: File dependencies are generally discouraged.
Instead, prefer declaring dependencies on an external repository, or if necessary, declaring a maven or ivy repository using a `file://` URL.

image::dependency-management-file-dependencies.png[]

File dependencies are unique because they represent a direct reference to files on the filesystem without any associated <<glossary.adoc#sub:terminology_module_metadata,metadata>>, such as transitive dependencies, origin, or author information.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-fileDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=file-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/declaringDependencies-fileDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=file-dependencies]"]
====

In this example, each dependency explicitly specifies its location within the file system.
Common methods for referencing these files include:

- link:link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:files(java.lang.Object++[]++)[`Project.files()`]: Accepts one or more file paths directly.
- link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/file/ProjectLayout.html#files-java.lang.Object++...++-[`ProjectLayout.files()`]: Accepts one or more file paths directly.
- link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.Project.html#org.gradle.api.Project:fileTree(java.lang.Object)[`Project.fileTree()`]: Defines a directory and includes or excludes specific file patterns.

[NOTE]
====
The order of files in a `FileTree` is not guaranteed to be stable, even on the same computer.
As a result, dependency configurations using `FileTree` may produce resolution results with varying order, which can impact the cacheability of tasks that use these results as inputs.
To ensure more predictable and stable behavior, it is recommended to use the simpler `files` method where possible.
====

Alternatively, you can use a <<supported_repository_types.adoc#sec:flat-dir-resolver,flat directory>> repository to specify the source directory for multiple file dependencies.

Ideally, you should use Maven or Ivy repository with a local URL:

[source,groovy]
----
repositories {
    maven {
        url = 'file:///path/to/local/files' // Replace with your actual path
    }
}
----

To add files as dependencies, pass a <<working_with_files.adoc#sec:file_collections,file collection>> to the configuration:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=file-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/externalDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=file-dependencies]"]
====

Note that file dependencies are not included in the published dependency descriptor for your project.
However, they are available in transitive dependencies within the same build, meaning they can be used within the current build but not outside it.

You should specify which tasks produce the files for a file dependency.
Otherwise, the necessary tasks might not run when you depend on them transitively from another project:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/generatedFileDependencies/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=generated-file-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/artifacts/generatedFileDependencies/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=generated-file-dependencies]"]
====

----
$ gradle -q list
include::{snippetsPath}/artifacts/generatedFileDependencies/tests/generatedFileDependencies.out[]
----

[[sec:gradle-distribution-dependencies]]
== Gradle distribution-specific dependencies

[[sec:api-dependencies]]
=== Gradle API dependency

You can declare a dependency on the API of the current version of Gradle by using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler:gradleApi()[DependencyHandler.gradleApi()] method.
This is done implicitly when using the <<java_library_plugin.adoc,Java Gradle (`java-gradle-plugin`)>> Plugin.
This is useful when you are developing custom Gradle tasks or plugins:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/customExternalTask/kotlin/task",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=gradle-api-dependencies]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/base/customExternalTask/groovy/task",files="build.gradle[tags=gradle-api-dependencies]"]
====

[[sec:testkit-dependencies]]
=== Gradle TestKit dependency

You can declare a dependency on the TestKit API of the current version of Gradle by using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler:gradleTestKit()[DependencyHandler.gradleTestKit()] method.
This is useful for writing and executing functional tests for Gradle plugins and build scripts:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/testKit/junitQuickstart/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=declare-gradle-testkit-dependency]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/testKit/junitQuickstart/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=declare-gradle-testkit-dependency]"]
====

[[sec:groovy-dependencies]]
=== Local Groovy dependency

You can declare a dependency on the Groovy that is distributed with Gradle by using the link:{groovyDslPath}/org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler.html#org.gradle.api.artifacts.dsl.DependencyHandler:localGroovy()[DependencyHandler.localGroovy()] method.
This is useful when you are developing custom Gradle tasks or plugins in Groovy:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/groovy/groovyDependency/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=bundled-groovy-dependency]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/groovy/groovyDependency/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=bundled-groovy-dependency]"]
====

[[sec:documenting-dependencies]]
== Documenting dependencies

When declaring a dependency or a <<dependency_constraints.adoc#dependency-constraints,dependency constraint>>, you can provide a reason to clarify why the dependency is included.
This helps make your build script and the <<viewing_debugging_dependencies.adoc#sec:identifying-reason-dependency-selection,dependency insight report>> easier to interpret:

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/inspectingDependencies-dependencyReason/kotlin",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=dependency-reason]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/dependencyManagement/inspectingDependencies-dependencyReason/groovy",files="build.gradle[tags=dependency-reason]"]
====

In this example, the link:{javadocPath}/org/gradle/api/artifacts/DependencyConstraint.html#because(java.lang.String)[`because()`] method provides a reason for including the `asm` library, which helps explain its purpose in the context of the build:

----
$ gradle -q dependencyInsight --dependency asm
include::{snippetsPath}/dependencyManagement/inspectingDependencies-dependencyReason/tests/dependencyReasonReport.out[]
----
